# View layer

ZfrRest comes with a simple but flexible view layer to render. ZfrRest does not come with any automatism, and
expect that you build your answer. This offers the most flexibility.

In ZfrRest, views are simple PHP files, that are named after the controller (but you can override them as you will
see later).

## Configuring your views

Like standard .phtml views, you must configure the template resolver so that ZF2 is able to locate your views. To do
this, adds the following lines in your `module.config.php` file (you need to do it for each module config that uses
views):

```php
'view_manager' => [
    'template_path_stack' => [
        'application' => __DIR__ . '/../view'
    ]
]
```

Where `application` is the name of your module. If you have many templates, you may want to generate a `template_map`.

## Template name anatomy

In ZfrRest, templates can be versioned. They allow you to render the same resource in different way, which is useful
for rendering. ZfrRest will prefix the template name by the version to use. By default, if you do not specify
explicitly a version, it will default to `default` version.

> In the future, ZfrRest will allow to automatically extract version through URL or Accept header.

For instance, if you are in the `get` method of the UserController, in the `Application` module:

```php
use Application\Controller;

class UserController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    public function get(array $params)
    {
        // Get your user...

        return new ResourceViewModel(['user' => $user]);
    }
}
```

ZfrRest will look for the `user.php` template, located in the `default > application` folder. Your `view` folder should
look like this:

```
-- view
  -- default
    -- application
      -- user.php
```

If you want to force another version, you can pass options as the second parameter of the ResourceViewModel
constructor:

```php
use Application\Controller;

class UserController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    public function get(array $params)
    {
        // Get your user...

        return new ResourceViewModel(['user' => $user], ['version' => 'v2']);
    }
}
```

Because we have explicitly set a version, ZfrRest will now look for the template `user.php` located in the
`v2 > application` folder.

Finally, you can specify your own template name (if you want to nest names, or don't like the fact that views
are namespaced by module), by passing the optional `template` option:

```php
use Application\Controller;

class UserController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    public function get(array $params)
    {
        // Get your user...

        return new ResourceViewModel(['user' => $user], ['template' => 'users/user');
    }
}
```

> When specifying a custom template name, you should **never** prepend by the version, or append the `.php` suffix,
as this is done automatically for you.

In the example, ZfrRest will expect a template `user.php` in the `default > users > user` folder:

```
-- view
  -- default
    -- users
      -- user.php
```

## Writing templates

The template is the place where you actually render the resource. You can perform very complex rendering, because
you can pass arbitrary variables to the view.

Contrary to standard ZF2 views, you must return an array, that will be automatically converted to JSON. Here is
a simple template that simply display a user:

```php
return [
    'id'         => $this->user->getId(),
    'first_name' => $this->user->getFirstName(),
    'last_name'  => $this->user->getLastName()
];
```

Simple, isn't it?

### View helpers

Actually, because this is a standard ZF2 view, you can take advantage of any built-in view helpers, and even write
your own. However, ZfrRest comes with two built-in helpers: `renderPaginator` and `renderResource`.

#### Render Paginator

The `renderPaginator` helper accepts a paginator, and output three attributes: `limit`, `offset` and `total`. This
way, you can keep your code clean:

```php
$data = [];

// ... Format your resources ...
// ...

// This assumes that 'users' is a \Zend\Paginator\Paginator instance
$data['meta'] = $this->renderPaginator($this->users);
```

#### Render Resource

We often render resources at different places. For instance, the URI `/users` will render a list of users, but
`/users/1` will render a single user. However, we often want the user to be rendered the same, and we want to avoid
having to duplicate the rendering.

To that extent, ZfrRest comes with a view helper called `renderResource` that accepts three parameters: a template,
a set of values that will act as the new context within the template, and an optional version (by default, it reuses
the same version). This allows you to compose your views and reducing the code duplication. Here are various
use cases.

##### Rendering a collection of resources and single resource

If you have both a `/users` and `/users/:user_id` endpoint, you could have a `users/user.php` template that render a
single user:

```php
return [
    'id'         => $this->user->getId(),
    'first_name' => $this->user->getFirstName(),
    'last_name'  => $this->user->getLastName()
];
```

Then, instead of duplicating this logic inside the `users.php` template, simply reuse it:

```php
// inside the users.php template
$data = [];

foreach ($this->users as $user) {
    $data['users'][] = $this->renderResource('users/user', ['user' => $user]);
}
```

This will call the `users/user` template for each user, with a new context at each iteration.

##### Rendering the same resource in different URI

The same resource may be accessible through different endpoints. For instance, a `/users/1/tweets` would display
tweets (but for a given users), while the `/tweets` URI would display tweets (for everyone). But the rendering
logic should be exactly the same.

For instance, this could be your `tweets.php` template (that itself reuse the `tweets/tweet` template):

```php
$data = [];

foreach ($this->tweets as $tweet) {
    $data['tweets'][] = $this->renderResource('tweets/tweet', ['tweet' => $tweet]);
}
```

And your `users/tweets.php` would only reuse the same template:

```php
return $this->renderResource('tweets', ['tweets' => $this->tweets]);
```

Alternatively, you could also remove the need to create a separate template, and manually set the `tweets` template
when creating the resource view model.

##### Nested resources

Let's say that endpoint `/users/1` will display a user resource with its `company` resource directly embedded (this
is often used in REST API to avoid too many API calls). However, the `company` could also be retrieved alone through
the `/users/1/companies` endpoint. To that extent, you will likely have a `company.php` template used to render
a single company. Instead of duplicating the logic of rendering a company within the user, just use the `renderResource`
helper:

```php
return [
    'id'         => $this->user->getId(),
    'first_name' => $this->user->getFirstName(),
    'last_name'  => $this->user->getLastName(),
    'company'    => $this->renderResource('company', ['company' => $this->user->getCompany()])
];
```

##### Reuse template for multiple versions

Often, versioning an API is actually *changing* the representation of a resource. For instance, let's say that
your endpoint `/cards/1` allow to output a credit card. When you initially created the API, you decided to name
the brand of the card `type`. You would have a template like that:

```php
return [
    'id'        => $this->card->getId(),
    'type'      => $this->card->getType(),
    'last4'     => $this->card->getLast4(),
    'exp_month' => $this->card->getExpMonth(),
    'exp_year'  => $this->card->getExpYear()
];
```

Later on, you decide that `type` is confusing, and you want to rename it `brand`, but all other properties
should stay the same. You therefore release a new version of your API. Instead of duplicating the whole rendering
logic, simply create a new template, in the `v2` folder:

```php
$data = $this->renderResource('card', ['card' => $this->card], 'default');
$data['brand'] = $data['type'];
unset($data['type']);

return $data;
```

In this example, we have explicitly asked the representation of the card resource in its default version (or v1). Then
we have done only the modifications relative to v2, and return the new representation.

If later on we release a v3 that is built over v2, we can simply extend from v2, and so on.

#### Detecting the root view model

Often, we render differently the root resource. For instance, we append pagination data, or we wrap the data around
a key like `data`. However, when rendering nested resources through `renderResource`, it may leads to wrong results.
To that extent, you can conditionally render those "root information", by using the `isRootTemplate` method, that is
accessible in each template:

```php
$users = [];

foreach ($this->users as $user) {
    $users[] = $this->renderResource('users/user', ['user' => $user]);
}

// If root, then we wrap this around a "users" key, and add the pagination data, otherwise we return as is
if ($this->isRootTemplate()) {
    return [
        'users' => $users,
        'meta'  => $this->renderPaginator($this->users)
    ];
} else {
    return $users;
}
```

### Using hydrators

For best flexibility, you should manually create your response like this, and compose them using `renderResource`.
However, if this is still too much for you, nothing prevents you to creating a hydrator (like ClassMethods), and
automatically extracting your data:

```php
$classMethods = new ClassMethods();
return $classMethods->extract($this->user);
```

* Continue to [**Using HTTP exceptions for reporting errors**](/docs/04. Using HTTP exceptions for reporting errors.md)
* Back to [the Controllers](/docs/02. Controllers.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)