# Quick Start

In this minimal example, we are going to create an API that allow to create, delete and retrieve one or many users
using ZfrRest.

## Creating your entity

The first thing to do is to create your entity. Let's keep it simple:

```php
<?php

namespace Application\Entity;

use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;

/**
 * @ORM\Entity
 * @ORM\Table(name="users")
 */
class User
{
    /**
     * @ORM\Id
     * @ORM\GeneratedValue(strategy="AUTO")
     * @ORM\Column(type="integer")
     *
     * @var int
     */
    protected $id;

    /**
     * @ORM\Column(type="string")
     *
     * @var string
     */
    protected $username;

    /**
     * @return int
     */
    public function getId()
    {
        return $this->id;
    }

    /**
     * @param string $username
     */
    public function setUsername($username)
    {
        $this->username = (string) $username;
    }

    /**
     * @return string
     */
    public function getUsername()
    {
        return $this->username;
    }
}
```

At this point there is nothing new. We just define fields with Doctrine ORM mapping.

## Adding ZfrRest mapping

Similar to Doctrine annotations, ZfrRest comes with some mapping. Modify your entity so it looks like this:

```php

namespace Application\Entity;

use Doctrine\ORM\Mapping as ORM;
use ZfrRest\Resource\Metadata\Annotation as REST;

/**
 * @ORM\Entity
 * @ORM\Table(name="users")
 * @REST\Resource(
 *      controller="Application\Controller\UserController",
 *      inputFilter="Application\InputFilter\UserInputFilter",
 *      hydrator="Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\ClassMethods"
 * )
 * @REST\Collection(
 *      controller="Application\Controller\UsersController",
 *      hydrator="Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\ClassMethods"
 * )
 */
class User
{
    // ... unchanged
}
```

We added two essential annotations: `Resource` and `Collection`. The `Resource` is used whenever the matched resource
is a single item. For instance, if you reach the URL `/users/1`, what you actually retrieve is a **single** user.
ZfrRest will therefore dispatch it to the controller defined in the `Resource` annotation (in this case,
`Application\Controller\UserController`).

On the other whant, when you reach the URL `/users`, you retrieve a **collection** of users, and ZfrRest uses the
info defined in the `Collection` annotation.

This difference is important and you must be confident with it.

The input filter (which can currently only be defined on the `Resource` annotation) is used whenever ZfrRest needs
to validate data. This typically occurs on POST and PUT operations.

Finally, the hydrator is used for both creating an entity from POST/PUT data, and extracting entities to return the
payload to the client.

## Adding a route

The entry-point of our API is going to be `/users`. Therefore, we need to add the following config to our
`module.config.php` file:

```php
return [
    'router' => [
        'routes' => [
            'users' => [
                'type'    => 'ResourceGraphRoute',
                'options' => [
                    'route'    => '/users',
                    'resource' => 'UserObjectRepository'
                ]
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

This code says to ZfrRest that we have an entry point whose URL is `/users`, and that the initial resource is a
Doctrine object repository (in this case, a User repository). Internally, ZfrRest uses the Doctrine Criteria API
to traverse the hierarchy, that's why we need an object that implements the `Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable`
interface.

Add the following config, so that ZfrRest can properly retrieve the object repository:

```php
return [
    'service_manager' => [
        'factories' => array(
            'UserObjectRepository' => function($sm) {
                $objectManager = $sm->get('doctrine.entitymanager.orm_default');
                return $objectManager->getRepository('Application\Entity\User');
            }
        )
    ]
];
```

> If you don't want to define a factory for each repository, you can create an abstract factory, but this is beyond
the scope of this quick start.

## Adding controllers

In our user mapping, we defined two controllers: `Application\Controller\UserController` and
`Application\Controller\UsersController`. Let's create them, and add them to your config:

```php
return [
    'controllers' => array(
        'invokables' => array(
            'Application\Controller\UserController'  => 'Application\Controller\UserController',
            'Application\Controller\UsersController' => 'Application\Controller\UsersController'
        ),
    ),
];
```

### Writing our controllers

Now, let's the fun part begin. For this example, let's assume we want to create a new user, update an existing user,
delete an existing user, retrieving a single user and list all users. Using HTTP verbs, this translates to:

* `POST` /users => add a new user
* `PUT` /users/1 => update an existing user
* `DELETE` /users/1 => delete an existing user
* `GET` /users/1 => retrieve a single user by id
* `GET` /users   => retrieve all users

The question is: which action should belong to which controller? It's actually pretty simple and intuitive once you
understand it. Here is a table that can help you:

HTTP VERB | URI EXAMPLE | CONTROLLER TYPE | TRANSLATION
--------- | ----------- | --------------- | -----------
`POST`    | `/users`    | Collection controller | Adding a new user into a *collection* of users
`PUT`     | `/users/1`  | Resource controller | Modifying an existing, *single* user
`DELETE`  | `/users/1`  | Resource controller | Deleting an existing, *single* user
`GET`     | `/users`    | Collection controller | Retrieving a *collection* of users
`GET`     | `/users/1`  | Resource controller | Retrieving an existing, *single*  user

This can be a bit confusing at first, but it really makes sense once you play with it.

Let's first define our `Application\Controller\UserController`:

```php
<?php

namespace Application\Controller;

use Application\Entity\User;
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class UserController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    /**
     * @var UserService
     */
    protected $userService;

    public function delete(User $user)
    {
        $this->userService->delete($user);
    }

    public function put(User $user)
    {
        $this->userService->update($user);

        return $user;
    }

    public function get(User $user)
    {
        // Do things if you want

        return $user;
    }
}
```

One important thing to note: all ZfrRest controllers **must** extend `ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController`.

As you can guess, each "action" is named after the corresponding HTTP method. ZfrRest is flexible enough that you can
add custom HTTP verbs.

The interesting thing is that, contrary to traditional ZF2 controllers, you receive a parameter in each method: the
actual resource (in this case, a User). You have nothing to do, this is done automatically by ZfrRest, so that your
controller is really clean. The only thing you need to do is passing the resource to the service for your business logic.

For the `put` method, you don't even need to manually validate the user data, because it has already been validated
using the input filter you specified in the mapping. If data would have been invalid, it would have returned a
400 Bad Request error, with the various error messages under the `errors` key.

Note that you should also return the `$user` object. If you return nothing, ZfrRest will just return a 200 status
code, but with an empty body.

Now, let's see the `Application\Controller\UsersController` controller:

```php
<?php

namespace Application\Controller;

use Application\Entity\User;
use Zend\Paginator\Paginator;
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class UsersController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    /**
     * @var UserService
     */
    protected $userService;

    public function post(User $user)
    {
        $this->userService->create($user);

        return $user;
    }

    public function get(Paginator $users)
    {
        $users->setCurrentPageNumber($this->params()->fromQuery('page'));

        return $users;
    }
}
```

For the `post` method, it is exactly the same as the `put` method: you don't need to validate anything, because
it has already been done for you. Just pass the entity to your service and you're done!

For the `get` method, this is a bit more interesting: whenever ZfrRest detects a collection, it actually wraps
it around a `Zend\Paginator\Paginator` instance. You can therefore directly deal with the paginator, and return it!

When you return a Paginator, ZfrRest will intelligently serialize the output. For instance, here is an example
of the JSON output:

```json
{
    "limit":10,
    "offset":0,
    "total":3,
    "items":
    [
        {
            "id":1,
            "username":"bar"
        },
        {
            "id":2,
            "username":"foo"
        },
        {
            "id":3,
            "username":"test"
        }
    ]
}
```

### Prevent some HTTP verb

If you don't want a specific HTTP verb, just don't implement the method in your controller. If a user tries to
access this URL, ZfrRest will return a 405 Method Not Allowed exception.
