# Controllers

In this section, we'll cover more advanced concepts of the controller part in ZfrRest.

## Method handlers

A method handler is a specific object that implement the `ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\MethodHandler\MethodHandlerInterface`
interface. Its task is to perform some logic before and after passing the resource to the controller.

ZfrRest is bundled with handlers for all basic HTTP verbs: `DELETE`, `GET`, `OPTIONS`, `POST` and `PUT`.

Here is, for example, the delete handler:

```php
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class DeleteHandler implements MethodHandlerInterface
{
    public function handleMethod(AbstractRestfulController $controller, ResourceInterface $resource)
    {
        // If no delete method is defined on the controller, then we cannot do anything
        if (!method_exists($controller, 'delete')) {
            throw new MethodNotAllowedException();
        }

        $result = $controller->delete($resource->getData(), $resource->getMetadata());

        // According to http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec9.html#sec9.7, status code should
        // be 204 if nothing is returned
        if (empty($result)) {
            $controller->getResponse()->setStatusCode(204);
        }

        return $result;
    }
}
```

As you can see, the handler first checks if the `delete` method exists on your controller, and throw a
`MethodNotAllowedException` otherwise.

It then gives the resource (for instance, a User object) to your controller so that you can perform the logic of
deleting the resource. Then, it performs various checks to be as compliant as possible with various standards.

Some handlers are most complex, because they perform validation and hydration (for instance post and put handlers).

### Overriding existing handlers

If you want to override an existing handler to perform your own logic, you can altering the
`MethodHandlerPluginManager` configuration. In your config, add the following:

```php
return [
    'zfr_rest' => [
        'method_handlers' => [
            'invokables' => [
                'get' => 'Application\Handler\CustomGetHandler'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

### Adding handler for custom verbs

Alternatively, you can add support for custom HTTP verbs exactly the same way as outlines before:

```php
return [
    'zfr_rest' => [
        'method_handlers' => [
            'invokables' => [
                'funkyVerb' => 'Application\Handler\FunkyVerbHandler'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Now, you can have a `funkyVerb` method in your REST controllers, and it will be interpreted by ZfrRest.

## Configuring controller behaviours

By default, ZfrRest does a lot of things automatically for you. For instance, when doing a `POST` or `PUT` request,
it automatically validates the data and create a new object using a hydrator, so that your controller directly
receive a ready-to-consume object.

However, you may want to keep control on those steps, and doing the validation and hydration yourself. To that extent,
you can override two properties in controllers, namely `autoValidate` and `autoHydrate`. For instance:

```php
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class PasswordResetListController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    protected $autoHydrate = false;

    public function post(array $data)
    {
        // For instance
        $passwordReset = $this->passwordResetService->createFromEmail($data['email']);

        return $this->resourceModel($passwordReset);
    }
}
```

With this config, ZfrRest will still validate data using the input filter from the mapping, however it won't
hydrate data. As a consequence, instead of receiving an object in your action, you will receive an array. This
is very handy when data coming from POST request needs heavy customization and cannot be mapped directly to an
entity!

You can configure those settings per controller, which make things extremely flexible!

> NOTE: By default, both `$autoValidate` and `$autoHydrate` are set to true. While there are a lot of use cases
where setting `autoHydrate` to false makes sense, it is not recommended to set `autoValidate` to false, because
you will receive potentially malicious data. It's therefore up to you to manually validate and filter your data
if you turn off this option!

### Navigation

* Continue to [**Built-in listeners**](/docs/05. Built-in listeners.md)
* Back to [Using HTTP exceptions for reporting errors](/docs/03. Using HTTP exceptions for reporting errors.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
