# Built-in listeners

ZfrRest registers various listeners to do its work. This section will give you more details about each of them.

## CreateResourceModelListener

This listener listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_DISPATCH` with a priority of -40. Its task is to create a
`ZfrRest\View\Model\ResourceModel` from your resource data.

## HttpExceptionListener

This listener listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_DISPATCH_ERROR` with a priority of 500. Its task is to check if the
exception implements the `ZfrRest\Http\Exception\HttpExceptionInterface`, or if the thrown exception is in the
exception map.

If this is the case, a new Response is created, and the exception configure the response (for instance, a
`NotFoundException` will automatically set a status code of 404). If there is additional content (for instance a
list of errors set by an input filter), this content is encoded as JSON into the body.

## HttpMethodOverrideListener

This listener listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_ROUTE` with a priority of 10000. It is not registered by default, so if
you want it, use the following config:

```php
return [
    'zfr_rest' => [
        'options' => [
            'register_http_method_override_listener' => true
        ]
    ]
];
```

This listener checks if the request contains a header called `X-HTTP-Method-Override` in the request. If so, it
replaces the current HTTP method with the value contained in this header.

This listener can be useful in some companies where only a subset of HTTP verbs are allowed, or when using forms
(where only GET and POST are supported).
