# View layer

## Customizing output

In a typical ZfrRest application, once you return from your controllers, the resource will be converted into
a `ZfrRest\View\Model\ResourceModel` object. A specific strategy is automatically registered so that whenever
a `ResourceModel` is detected, the `ZfrRest\View\Renderer\ResourceRenderer` renderer is used.

This renderer is very basic:

* For a single item, it will use a hydrator to extract data.
* For a collection of items, it will use a hydrator to extract data from each item, and wrap each item representation
into a "items" key. If it detects that the collection is a Paginator, it will also output some details like the offset
or the total count.
* Everything is outputted into JSON.

However, you can easily create your own renderer. By default, when it receives a paginator, it uses the `limit`,
`offset` and `total` keys. If you are not satisfied with those, let's create a new ResourceRenderer that extends
the basic one:

```php
class CustomResourceRenderer extends ResourceRenderer
{
    protected function renderCollection($collection, HydratorInterface $hydrator)
    {
        $payload = [];

        if ($collection instanceof Paginator) {
            $payload = [
                'page'  => $collection->getCurrentPageNumber()
                'count' => $collection->getTotalItemCount()
            ];
        }

        foreach ($collection as $item) {
            $payload['items'][] = $this->renderItem($item, $hydrator);
        }

        return $payload;
    }
}
```

We just overloaded the `renderCollection` method, and we outputted `page` and `count` instead.

Now, we need to modify the service manager config so that we can specify our own renderer for the
`ZfrRest\View\Renderer\ResourceRenderer`:

```php
return [
    'service_manager' => [
        'factories' => [
            'ZfrRest\View\Renderer\ResourceRenderer' => 'Application\Factory\CustomResourceRendererFactory',

            'Application\Factory\CustomResourceRendererFactory' => function($sm) {
                return new CustomResourceRenderer($sm->get('HydratorManager'));
            }
        ],
    ],
];
```

## What should I customize?

In the renderer, you should not directly interact with the resource, or modify it. Instead, this step is mostly
for customizing the output. For instance, you may want to return properties using underscore_separated names
(by iterating into each properties and inflecting the key). This is an ideal place to do it.

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Cookbook**](/docs/07. Cookbook.md)
* Back to [the Built-in listeners](/docs/05. Built-in listeners.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
