# Cookbook

## How to implement the OPTIONS method?

You have nothing to do. If you don't use any custom HTTP verbs, when an `OPTIONS` request is made to a resource,
ZfrRest automatically checks which actions are implemented on your controller, and return them in the `Allow` header
of the response.

If you are using custom HTTP verbs, you can implement yourself the `options` action in your controller, and ZfrRest
will use it instead of the built-in discovering behaviour:

```php
class MyController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    public function options()
    {
        return ['post', 'put', 'funky'];
    }
}
```

## How to customize the payload (like removing specific fields)?

When returning a representation of your resource, you may want to customize heavily the payload. For instance, you
may want to not return the `password` property.

All of this is done through the use of hydrators. You can use built-in ZF2 hydrators like `Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\ClassMethods`,
but for most complex use cases, the best way is to simply create a custom hydrator, and personalize it.

ZfrRest uses hydrators both to hydrate incoming data (for example from POST and PUT requests) and to extract
data. ZfrRest pulls all the hydrators from the ZF2 hydrator plugin manager.

Once your hydrator is defined, add it to the hydrator plugin manager using the following config:

```php
return [
    'hydrators' => [
        'invokables' => [
            'Application\Hydrator\UserHydrator' => 'Application\Hydrator\UserHydrator'
        ]
    ]
];
```

Here is an example of a simple hydrator that filters the "getPassword" method.

```php
use Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\ClassMethods;
use Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\Filter\MethodMatchFilter;
use Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\Filter\FilterComposite;

class UserHydrator extends ClassMethods
{
    public function __construct()
    {
        parent::__construct();

        // Add a filter so that "getPassword" is not called, hence "password" is not outputted
        $this->filterComposite->addFilter(
            "password",
            new MethodMatchFilter('getPassword'),
            FilterComposite::CONDITION_AND
        );
    }
}
```

## How to specify a custom input filter?

ZfrRest uses input filters to validate data when POSTing and PUTing data. ZfrRest pulls all the input filters from
the ZF2 input filter plugin manager.

Once your input filter is defined, add it to the input filter plugin manager using the following config:

```php
return [
    'input_filters' => [
        'invokables' => [
            'Application\InputFilter\UserInputFilter' => 'Application\InputFilter\UserInputFilter'
        ]
    ]
];
```

## How to filter a collection using query params?

When you receive a large collection for `GET` requests, there are chances that you want to filter the collection,
either to paginate the data, or to apply additional filters based on some criteria. Hopefully, this is really easy
to do with ZfrRest.

For instance, in your controller:

```php
use Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable;

public function get(Selectable $users)
{
    $paginator = $this->paginatorWrapper($users);
    $paginator->setCurrentPageNumber($this->params()->fromQuery('page', 1));

    return $this->resourceModel($paginator);
}
```

The `paginatorWrapper` is a simple controller plugin that wrap data around a paginator. Currently, it only supports
data that implements either `Doctrine\Common\Collections\Collection` or `Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable`
interfaces.

If you work with Doctrine ORM, you will always receive `Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable`.

The `paginatorWrapper` plugin also supports an optional second parameter that allows to add additional filtering
on the collection. For instance, if you want to filter on an additional query param:

```php
use Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable;

public function get(Selectable $users)
{
    $criteria = ['username' => $this->params()->fromQuery('username')];

    $paginator = $this->paginatorWrapper($users, $criteria);
    $paginator->setCurrentPageNumber($this->params()->fromQuery('page', 1));

    return $this->resourceModel($paginator);
}
```

The plugin always use an equality operator for criteria. If you need more complex filtering (based on less than
or greater than operators for instance), you can manually create your own `Doctrine\Common\Collections\Criteria`
object. For instance:

```php
use DateTime;
use Doctrine\Common\Collections\Criteria;
use Doctrine\Common\Collections\Selectable;

public function get(Selectable $users)
{
    $eb       = Criteria::expr();
    $expr     = $eb->lt('registeredAt', new DateTime($this->params()->fromQuery('registeredAt')));
    $criteria = new Criteria($expr);

    $paginator = $this->paginatorWrapper($users, $criteria);
    $paginator->setCurrentPageNumber($this->params()->fromQuery('page', 1));

    return $this->resourceModel($paginator);
}
```

## How to serialize custom data that do not belong to the entity?

When dealing with very complex system, you may want to customize quite heavily the output of your responses. For
instance, let's say that your `User` entity contains the fields `id`, `username` and `email`, as well as an
association called `friends`. You may want to output a new property called `friends_count`. However this property
does not really exist in your `User` entity. Rather, it's a computed property.

The best way to do it is to provide a custom hydrator, and inject service into it. First, the ZfrRest mapping that
add our custom hydrator:

```php
/**
 * @REST\Resource(hydrator="Application\Hydrator\CustomUserHydrator")
 */
class User
{
}
```

Now, the hydrator:

```php
class CustomUserHydrator extends \Zend\Stdlib\Hydrator\ClassMethods
{
    protected $friendsService;

    public function __construct(FriendsService $friendsService)
    {
        $this->friendsService = $friendsService;
    }

    public function extract($object)
    {
        $extract                  = parent::extract($object);
        $extract['friends_count'] = $this->friendsService->countByUser($object);

        return $extract;
    }
}
```

You finally just need to add this custom hydrator to the hydrator plugin manager, and writing the corresponding
factory.

## How to deal with actions?

While REST architecture simplifies the creation of APIs, going "the RESTful way" at all costs is often a bad idea. An
example is actions. This does not map well to a REST architecture: think about a post that you want to like or unlike.

If you want to go 100% RESTful, you have two choices: you could either use a custom HTTP verb (like LIKE and UNLIKE), but
this is not supported by all browsers and CDNs, or you could go with a "like" sub-resources, so you could add a like
using the following URL: POST `posts/4/likes` and removing it using the following URL: DELETE `posts/4/likes/64`.

However, this really complicates your back-end for very few benefits. In those cases, the simplest is to use simpler
actions. ZfrRest does not provide any mechanism out-of-the box, so what you should do is simply using standard
controllers and routes that extend `Zend\Mvc\Controller\AbstractActionController`.

Then, define specific routes in your config files:

```php
'router' => [
    'routes' => [
        'action-posts' => [
            'type'    => 'Segment',
            'options' => [
                'route'    => '/posts/:post_id/:action',
                'defaults' => [
                    'controller' => LikePostController::class
                ],
                'constraints' => [
                    'post_id' => '[0-9]+',
                    'action'  => '[like|unlike]'
                ]
            ],
            'priority' => 2, // Make sure it's evaluated BEFORE REST route
        ]
    ]
]
```

> Please note the priority parameter. This is used so that those routes are actually evaluated BEFORE any REST routes.

## How to call custom repository methods?

ZfrRest uses the Doctrine Criteria API to automatically traverses the route hierarchy, and matching the sub-paths. While
very powerful and flexible (it can work either in ORM or ODM), it lacks advanced features like joins or fancy filtering
like full text filtering or geospatial filtering. For cases like that or for very performance sensitive queries that
cannot be done using the criteria API, the best solution is to use custom repositories with hand-written DQL (or even
SQL).

ZfrRest does not provide any way to do that automatically, but it can be done very easily. Let's imagine that you want
to filter FourSquare "check-ins" by geolocation. Here is your controller (we assume mapping and routes are properly
defined):

```php
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class CheckInListController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    public function get(Selectable $checkIns)
    {
        $latitude  = $this->params()->fromQuery('latitude');
        $longitude = $this->params()->fromQuery('longitude');

        // What to do?
    }
}
```

ZfrRest has properly routed the request to the right controller, and as for any ZfrRest controllers, you receive the
checkins as a parameter. A nice side-effect of Criteria API is that, at this point, the query *has not been done* to
the database, which gives us a chance to use our custom service:

```php
use ZfrRest\Mvc\Controller\AbstractRestfulController;

class CheckInListController extends AbstractRestfulController
{
    protected $checkInService;

    public function __construct(CheckInService $checkInService)
    {
        $this->checkInService = $checkInService;
    }

    public function get(Selectable $checkIns)
    {
        $latitude  = $this->params()->fromQuery('latitude');
        $longitude = $this->params()->fromQuery('longitude');

        // The service can in turn call an optimized query from the repository
        $checkIns = $this->checkInService->getByCoordinates($latitude, $longitude);

        return $this->resourceModel($checkIns);
    }
}
```

Your service can either return a Collection or a Paginator, the resource renderer will take care of that for you! Note
that as we completely ignore the `Selectable $checkIns` that is given for us automatically, we can even remove it from
the method signature, so our controller stays clean and simple.

## Tuning ZfrRest for production

For maximum performance, here are a few best practices:

### Using APC cache for annotation parsing

By default, ZfrRest will parse your annotations at each requests. This can be very slow. In your config file,
change the cache option to use something like APC:

```php
'zfr_rest' => [
    'cache' => ['adapter' => 'apc']
]
```

### Using cache

We need to wait Doctrine 2.5 for that. But I promise, that will be truly awesome.

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Mapping reference**](/docs/08. Mapping reference.md)
* Back to [the View layer](/docs/06. View layer.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
