# Mapping reference

## Annotations

To use annotations in your entities, you must import the `ZfrRest\Resource\Metadata\Annotation` namespace:

```php
use ZfrRest\Resource\Metadata\Annotation as REST;
```

### Resource

Allow to define mapping when a resource is accessed as a single resource.

Attributes:

* `controller`: FQCN of the controller (pulled from the controller plugin manager)
* `inputFilter`: FQCN of the input filter (pulled from the input filter plugin manager)
* `hydrator`: FQCN of the hydrator (pulled from the hydrator plugin manager).

### Collection

Allow to define mapping when a resource is accessed as a collection.

Attributes:

* `controller`: FQCN of the controller (pulled from the controller plugin manager)

### Association

Only allowed at property level.

Attributes:

* `routable`: defines if the association can be routable. For instance, if an entity `User` has an association to
an `Address` entity, having `routable` set to true allows to access the address through the `/users/:id/address` URI.
Otherwise, this URI will returns a 404. By default, this is set to false for better security.
* `path`: allow to customize the URI from which the association is accessible (default to the property's name). Only
works if `routable` is set to true.
* `extraction`: defines how an association is rendered by the resource renderer. This can take the values `NONE` (the
association is not rendered and completely removes from the payload), `EMBED` (the association is recursively extracted
using the bound hydrator in the associated resource metadata), `ID` (only the identifier(s) is/are rendered) and
`PASS_THRU` (for instance, if a User hydrator renders an association that has PASS_THRU, then the rendered
result will be used for the given association). The default value is `ID`.

### Navigation

* Back to [the Cookbook](/docs/07. Cookbook.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
